---
title: The Challenge
author: Mohawk Mothers
publisher: Mohawk Mothers
date: 10/27/2022
URL: https://www.mohawkmothers.ca/the-challenge
tags:  indigenous
---

On October 27, 2022, @MohawkMothers won an important battle the first-ever injunction obtained by self-represented Indigenous peoples in a Canadian Court. Following their own Indigenous legal system, the Kaianerehkó:wa, @MohawkMothers reminded the Quebec Superior Court of their obligations vis-à-vis Indigenous peoples and called upon the Court to respect their own laws protecting Indigenous peoples from mistreatment, including extermination policies. In court, @MohawkMothers faced numerous adversaries, including top lawyers from McGill University, the Société Québécoise des Infrastructures (SQI), the McGill University Health Center (MUHC), the Royal Victoria Hospital, the City of Montreal, the Attorney General of Canada, and the Attorney General of Quebec.
The injunction issued by Justice Gregory Moore was issued on the basis of the plaintiffs’ (Mohawk Mothers) concerns that Indigenous children were used as test subjects in medical experiments at the Royal Victoria Hospital, and were potentially buried on the site slated for redevelopment. These concerns were based on both archival evidence and witness accounts, including a first-hand account of Lana Ponting, 81, a survivor of the CIA-funded MKULTRA mind control experiments. @MohawkMothers argued that the land set for redevelopment was the site of the precolonial Iroquoian village of Tekanontak (Mount Royal) and was used as a burial site before the arrival of Europeans. The necessity of using appropriate archaeological means to preserve the history of Iroquoian peoples cannot be a topic of debate.
Throughout the hearings on October 26th and 27th, defendants and promoters of the redevelopment project used an array of technical and legal arguments to convey the following
That the plaintiffs were using the wrong forum to lay their claims, as other administrative processes exist for such questions in the province of Québec;
That the promoters have not broken any law(s) and are respecting the Quebec Heritage Act (the plaintiffs asked that the Act be declared unconstitutional because it considers Indigenous heritage as the property of Quebec);
That most of the evidence submitted by the plaintiffs, the Special Interlocutor, as well as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Final Report, was not eligible for technical reasons; and
That the six plaintiffs did not represent the Mohawk people –(@MohawkMothers argued that in Indigenous culture, every individual is free and self-representing)
@MohawkMothers emphasized that it was their cultural duty to act as caretakers of their traditional territory, and to protect the children of past, present, and future generations. We also argued that allowing excavation work on the site could cause irreparable harm to the identity, history, and trust of Indigenous peoples. We emphasized that the situation was urgent shovels had already broken ground just two days before the hearings. 
The Court Ruling acknowledged that the balance of convenience favored @MohawkMothers, who would “suffer irreparable harm if the excavation work is not suspended for the time it takes to develop an appropriate archaeological plan to identify any unmarked graves,” following the best practices determined by the Canadian Archaeological Association. The ruling thus invited the parties to “speak out of court to settle their differences on an amicable basis.” The promoters were reminded of Call to Action number 76 (found in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Final Report), which relates to missing children and burial information
The Indigenous community most affected shall lead the development of the investigation;
Input must be sought from Survivors and Knowledge Keepers in developing those strategies;
Indigenous protocols shall be respected before any invasive technical inspection and investigation of a cemetery site. 
The ruling also ordered the defendants to fund the investigation. 
Following the injunction that was obtained on October 27, 2022, @MohawkMothers participated in negotiations with McGill University and the SQI to develop an archaeological plan for the site of the former Royal Victoria Hospital. A series of Judicial Settlement Conferences led all parties to adopt a settlement agreement which was homologated by the Quebec Superior Court and made public and enforceable on April 20, 2023.
The agreement, signed by @MohawkMothers, McGill University, the McGill University Health Center, the Attorney General of Canada, the Attorney General of Quebec, and the City of Montreal, provides that a panel of three archaeologists jointly selected by all parties will make recommendations for remote-sensing techniques that will ensure that no remains are destroyed or disturbed during excavation work. These techniques include Ground Penetrant Radar, search dogs, and LiDAR laser imaging. The panel’s recommendations will be binding to all parties. Cultural monitors, appointed by @MohawkMothers, will be present during the execution of the techniques to conduct appropriate ceremonies and to ensure that Indigenous protocols regarding burial sites are respected at all times. 
In addition, McGill University, the McGill University Health Center, and the Attorney General of Canada have committed to sharing archival materials under their custody that may be of assistance in locating unmarked graves, or which may provide information on the medical experiments that were conducted at the hospital. These materials will be gathered and studied by the historical research firm, Know History, with funding provided by Canada. A process for gathering the statements of survivors is also being initiated.
A preliminary investigation, spearheaded by @MohawkMothers since 2021, has led to several findings currently being examined with the help of archivists and historians. In an affidavit sharing the results of the preliminary investigation, and supported by 141 exhibits, anthropologist Philippe Blouin outlined evidence supporting the claim that the Royal Victoria Hospital site may hide unmarked Indigenous graves.
As the assimilation of Indigenous people was being carried out as part of the Residential School system Indigenous children were being sent to other disciplinary institutions as well, such as psychiatric wards, juvenile delinquency centers, correction homes, and reformatories. Through IQ tests, juvenile courts, Indian agents, as well as the health care system and military institutions, Indigenous and Inuit people were brought to the Royal Victoria Hospital where they were subjected to medical experiments.
Currently, more than 130 Indigenous children have been reported missing after being treated in Quebec hospitals since the 1950s. There are likely many more the names of many children were not recorded, as they had been taken from their families and deemed orphans. 
@MohawkMothers’ investigation aims to find all the children that have disappeared, using the best practices to do so, and to offer closure to the families by disclosing the full story of how they went missing.