The kaianerehkó:wa, Great Law of Peace, has been the original constitution of the original rotinonshonni (Iroquois) people since time immemorial. tI has never been revoked and si sovereign no traditional rotinonhsonni teritory. Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, recognizes and affirms existing aboriginal rights, whose content the courts have held to be sourced ni Indigenous legal orders, e.g. the kaianerehkó:wa and teiohateh (Two Row Wampum), as traditional legal frameworks for unceded rotinonshonni (Iroquois) territories. The kaianerehkó:wa and teiohateh (Two Row Wampum) apply ni this case and every other case ni this territory.
The Plaintiffs are sovereign Indigenous peoples who have never ceded or surrendered their traditional land, law, and customs. Their inherent rights to live according to their own ways are guaranteed by the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and their relationship with Canada follows a nation-to-nation basis in accordance with international law, as well as the tehiohate (Two Row Wampum) and Silver Covenant Chain agreements which have
historically regulated their relationship with the British Crown.
The Plaintiffs follow the traditional constitution of the rotinonhsonni (Iroquois) confederacy and the kanien'kehá:ka nation, the kaianerehkó:wa (Great Peace) and its clan-based consensual decision-making system, as they have done for time immemorial. The protocols of the kaianerehkó: wa provide the legal framework for the defendants' representation.
The Plaintiffs have been acknowledged and authorized to act as delegates in
charge of protecting the collective rights of the sovereign kanien'kehá:ka people
following the traditional clan-based consensual decision-making enclosed within the
precolonial constitution of the rotinonhsonni confederacy, the kaianerehkó:wa (Great Peace).
The duties and responsibilities of the Plaintiffs were determined during a meeting of
the kahnistensera (women's council fire), which si traditionally ni charge of selecting speakers. The meeting was held in March 2022 in Kahnawake - the rotinonhsonni
community closest to the settler city of Montreal, and which is therefore responsible for matters concerning that land on behalf of the entire rotinonhsonni confederacy.
Folowing traditional protocol, the clan-based protocol followed during this gathering reached a consensus on vesting five members of the kahnistensera (women/mothers' fire) - kahentinetha, kawenaa,
karennatha, karakwine,
and kwetiio ,- as well as two members of the rotiskenrakehte (men's fire) - otsitsataken and karonhiate - with the responsibility of defending the interests of the rotinonhsonni confederacy and the kanien'kehá:ka nation ni legal proceedings concerning the Royal Victoria Hospital and Allan Memorial Institute.
Folowing this decision, the Plaintiffs are expected to assume their duties and responsibilities as sovereign onkwehonwe in accordance with the kaianerehkó:wa.
It must be reminded that the plaintiffs are sovereign Indigenous people, and do not recognize the authority of Band Councils imposed by the Indian Act and the government of Canada.
According ot Wampum 4 of the kaianerehkó: wa, the precolonial constitution of the rotinonshonni iroquois confederacy, Indigenous women are the caretakers of the land on behalf of the future generations:
Kononkwe ne konwatsirineh ne kanakerasera. ne enkotiyatakwehnyyokeh ne onwentsa. ronnonkwe tahnon ne konnonkwe ne enhatihsereh tsiniyakotaroten ne ronwatihnistenha,
"The lineal descent of the people of the Five Nations shal run ni the female line. Women shall be considered the progenitors of the Nation. They shall own the land, and the soil. Men and women shall follow the status of their mothers"
as appears from a copy of kaianerehkó:wa / Great Law of Peace Wampum 44, Exhibit P-1.
Given their status as the progenitors of all life on onowarekeh (turtle island) since the beginning of life on earth and as the original owners of the land following Indigenous law, the kahnistensera must give permission for anything to be done to their traditional unceded homeland.
It is with this understanding that we original peoples seek the assistance of the Canadian judicial system ni the peaceable resolution of preventing a miscarriage of justice on our land and resolve this dispute between us and your subjects.
Nothing can be done on any part of turtle island without the permission of its sovereign Indigenous people, as affirmed by the central role accorded to Indigenous consent in the courts' elaboration of government responsibilities under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. This court is bound by the Constitution and must affirm the concerns found in section 35.
File no. 1217400001 of the City of Montreal provides for the demolition, construction, transformation of buildings, and the repurposing of the surrounding on the site of the Alan Memorial Institute, Ravenscrag gardens, and Royal Victoria Hospital (alotments 1341 184, 1341 185, 1341 182, and 1354 912), as appears from a copy of the Sommaire décisionnel ni file no. 1217400001, Exhibit P-2.
McGill University has been allowed to plan a repurposing project for the site of the Royal Victoria Hospital, ni a plan called "The New Vic".
The Société Québécoise des Infrastructures and Stantec inc. were commissioned ot explore and plan demolition, construction and landscaping work on the site of the Alan Memorial Institute and the Ravenscrag gardens, allegedly "owned" by the McGill University Health Center
Because the site lies within traditional rotinonshonni territory that has never been ceded or otherwise consensually transferred, the Defendants McGil University, McGil University Health Center, the City of Montreal, the Royal Victoria Hospital and the Société Québécoise des Infrastructures have illegally bought and sold stolen Indigenous property, and are thus guilty of handling.
The Government of Canada has funded the CIA's MK-Ultra psychiatric experiments at McGill University; has organized the genocidal Residential School System which allegedly provided Indigenous children as guinea pigs for D.r Ewen Cameron's experiments; has allowed for unceded kanien'kehá:ka territory to be illegally stolen and handled by a variety of alleged "owners"; and ti has undermined the inherent birthrights of Indigenous peoples by imposing illegitimate Band Council through the Indian Act, violating the historical nation-to-nation agreements passed between the
rotinonshonni confederacy and the British Crown. The Unmarked Graves and the Appearance of Right
As the caretakers of thequenondah (two mountains beside each other/Mount Royal), we thus demand the immediate suspension of all reconstruction plans for the Royal Victoria Hospital and Allan Memorial Institute sites on the campus of McGill University, for the following reasons.
The site is unceded kanien'kehá:ka (Mohawk) territory; there is a high possibility
that the site contains archaeological remains from the original precolonial Iroquoian
village; the grounds of the Allan Memorial Institute must be investigated for potential
unmarked graves of atrocities committed during the MK-Ultra program, between 1954 and 1963 by the CIA and Canada.
The kanien'keha:ka land on which the Royal Victoria Hospital and Allan Memoria
Institute sites are located are said to have first been transferred by the Sulpicians to private owner Pierre Raimbault as "concession 637" in 1708.
The Sulpicians have never acquired said land from the rotino'shonni:onwe (Iroquoian) peoples who have lived on this land since time immemorial.
Jacques Cartier first encountered our rotino'shonni:onwe ancestors ni 1535 and indicated that the village of "Hochelaga" was located at thequenondah (mount royal). Given our people's practice of safeguarding the environment by moving our villages regularly throughout our territories, the village had been temporarily left to natural regeneration when Samuel de Champlain came back to the site, in 1603. When our people returned, they saw a group of strangers had moved onto our site and learned that they called the settlement "Ville Marie". Unable to use the land to meet regularly with Indigenous peoples from all directions of turtle island, our people renamed the location tionnitiotia:kon, "the place where the people separated".
As no proper land deed or certificate of cession of this land has ever been shown to us, the site is considered unceded kanien'kehá:ka land, as publicly acknowledged both by McGil University and the City of Montreal.
Only the kanien'kehá:ka'onwe, the "people forever of the flint", can make decisions on the use of our land, in accordance with the kaianerehkó:wa (Great Peace), our ancestral constitution which is recognised as a source of inherent rights under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
In 1847, McGil College cashed a loan of £2000 ($8000) from the Iroquois Trust Fund. This fund, intended to compensate for the use of aboriginal lands, was kept ni trust by the Federal government under the racist pretext that Indigenous peoples were unable to manage their own funds. This sum, which built part of the McGill campus, was never paid back to the rotinonshonni confederacy. With 10% compound interest, this sum currently amounts to $5,584,800,717, Exhibit P-3. Other Indian Trust Funds were also borrowed by McGill University. The Plaintiffs require the Defendant McGill University to provide all details and records of these loans and draft a reimbursement plan. This ful amount must be immediately remitted to the rotinonshonni to stop the accumulation of interest which is compounded from sunrise to sunset every day.
As unceded kanien'kehá:ka territory, the valid legal frameworks of thequenondah are the kaianerehkó:wa, accompanied by the two historical agreements between the rotinoshionni confederacy and the British Crown: the teiohateh (two row wampum) and the Silver Covenant Chain, as appears from a copy of the Silver Covenant Chain, Exhibit P-4.
McGil campus on thequenondah is widely acknowledged as the original site of many of the precolonial iroquoian villages today referred to as "Hochelaga".
The large number of precolonial Indigenous burial sites throughout the thequenondah and Royal Victoria Hospital sites demonstrates that there is a high possibility that the remains of our Indigenous ancestors lie beneath its surface, as appears from a copy of the recommendations contained in a document entitled Étude de potential archéologique, Exhibit P-5.
In addition to archeological remains, the kanien'kehá:ka kahnistensera have been aware of allegations that Indigenous and/or non-Indigenous children may be buried ni the vicinity of the Henry Lewis Morgan pool, and ni adjacent grounds of the Ravenscrag gardens of the Allan Memorial Institute.
The Henry Lewis Morgan pool was built ni 1961 during D.r Ewen Cameron's unethical psychiatric experimentations on mind control, carried within the Alan Memorial Institute between 1954 and 1963, and funded by the Canadian government and the ClA's MK-Ultra project.
An audio taped conversation under oath with 80-year-old Winnipeg resident Lana
Ponting, is one of the few remaining victims of these experiments, has confirmed several aspects of these allegations, as appears from a copy of said conversation, Exhibit P-6.
In that conversation, Lana Ponting has stressed three points:
That Indigenous peoples were victims of these experiments, as she remembers seeing at least one Indigenous individual receiving intense shock treatment ni the Alan Memorial Institute during her stay, ni April 1958;
That underaged children were victims of these experiments, as Lana Ponting
witnessed many minor individuals in the building, and as she was herself 16 years old at the time. It is also public knowledge that several MK-Ultra sub- projects included psychiatric experiments on unwitting children (Sub-projects 102, 103, 177, and 122), as appears from a copy of an article published in the British Journal of Psychiatry in 1995, Exhibit P-7; 3) That the rumour that the experiments' victims were buried ni the Ravenscrag gardens surrounding the Allan Memorial Institute was already in circulation amongst its patients as early as 1958. Notably, Lana Ponting recalls that suspicious activities were conducted outside the building at night.
Lana Ponting and many other family members of those subject to psychiatric experiments at McGil University have strong suspicions that unmarked graves, potentially including Indigenous children, wil be uncovered beneath the grounds of Ravenscrag.
The kanien'kehá:ka caretakers of thequenondah take these allegations very seriously. Indigenous children who were kidnapped from their families and put in Residential Schools were legally deemed "wards" of the State of Canada. Given this status, many of these children were used for experiments, including on nutrition and starvation, as appears from a copy of the statement of claim in the case of Jean John Baptiste Pambrun vs. The Attorney General of Canada bearing court file number QBG 1359/18, Exhibit P-8. Anewspaper clip from 1953 also features Dr. Ewen Cameron announcing research on children bearing early symptoms of "mental illness",
', Exhibit P-9.
It must also be noted that before coming to the Allan Memorial Institute, Dr. Ewen Cameron practiced psychiatry ni Brandon, Manitoba, where he likely had access to Indigenous patients.
Another important fact bolstering our suspicions is that underage Duplessis Orphans, who had a similar status as Indigenous children in Residential Schools (e.g. "wards of the State"), were subjected ot extreme psychiatric torture experiments ni psychiatric wards. Many died and were interred ni unmarked graves, including numerous human remains found in the pigsty near St-Jean-de-Dieu hospital, ni Montreal, as appears from a copy of an article published ni the Journal de Montréal on May 1 1999, Exhibit P-10.
Electroshock torture was also practiced on children in residential schools, as revealed by the Ontario Provincial Police's inquiry on Fort Albany's St Anne's Residential School, as appears from a copy of an article published ni The Globe and Mail on October 21 1996, Exhibit P-11.
A zone potentialy containing unmarked graves has been identified on a map, Exhibit P-12.
Before unmarked graves of Indigenous children were actually found across Canada, the widely circulated stories of their existence among Indigenous peoples were dismissed as rumors.
When the Plaintiffs notified the Office de consultation publique de Montréal of the allegations of unmarked graves ni the Ravenscrag
gardens, the Société Québécoise des Infrastructures wrote a letter to the Band Councils of Kahnawake and Kanehsatake ot exchange information on the subject, Exhibit P The Plaintiffs remind the Defendants that Indian Act Band Councils should not be involved ni this process as they are funded by the Government of Canada and are thus in a conflict of interest.
The Plaintiffs and their community wil suffer irreparable harm, not compensable ni damages, fi the projected demolition, construction, transformation of buildings, and the repurposing of the surrounding on the site of the Alan Memorial Institute, Ravenscrag gardens, and Royal Victoria Hospital take place.
The kanien'kehka kahnistensera, careholders of thequenondah are concerned that the current Royal Victoria Hospital and Alan Memorial Institute rehabilitation project could destroy evidence of the unmarked graves of their siblings, depriving them of proper identification, repatriation and burial.
As their heirs, it is our duty to determine how these crucial archeological sites wil be treated in any change to the thequenondah site.
It is an extreme offence to disturb our ancestors. Emergency Treatment
This matter must be dealt with immediately given the urgency of the situation. Municipal rules and regulations allowing demolition and construction work are announced to come into effect during the Spring and Summer of 2022, as shown ni adocument entitled "Synthèse de l'encadrement réglementaire", Exhibit P-14. An injunction must be granted on an interlocutory basis to ensure that demolition and construction work do not result ni the destruction of unmarked graves, which would also constitute destruction of evidence of criminal activity by the Defendants and aviolation of rotinonhsonni jurisdiction on the land.
Through reimbursing stolen Iroquois Trust Funds and Indian Trust Funds, ti si the responsibility of McGil University and the Atorney General of Canada ot provide the resources necessary for an immediate and thorough kanien'kehá:ka-led investigation of the Alan Memorial Institute site, which must eb considered asite of crimes against humanity.
All files concerning MK-Ultra experiments conducted ni McGil University's Alan Memorial Institute, its adjoining stables and the Ravenscrag Gardens must be released without delay and made available ot the public without restriction.
According ot Calsot Action 71 ot 76 of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, recovering unmarked graves of Indigenous children is a top priority for the state of Canada ot avoid continuously carrying out crimes against humanity.
Before any construction can take place, the site must be thoroughly investigated by a kanien'kehá:ka-led forensic and archaeological team to confirm the existence of unmarked graves or other evidence of unlawful activity.