---
author: mohawk mothers
publisher: mohawk mothers
source: https://www.mohawkmothers.ca/recent-updates/5mrgjgp3uuxxrc62ns37lck7pswger
summary: a press release about tone of discourse, including mcgill_newsletter, mohawk-mothers-feel-pushed-aside-in-the-search-for-unmarked-graves, mcgill-reports-nine-potential-grave-zones-at-new-vic-site-a-week-after-security-verbally-assaulted-mohawk-mothers, archeological-dig-old-montreal-hospital-on-hold-mcgill-university, and mohawk-mothers-feel-pushed-aside-in-the-search-for-unmarked-graves
---

The Kahnistensera (Mohawk Mothers) are deeply concerned about McGill and the Société Québécoise des Infrastructures’ (SQI) recent actions in the archaeological search for unmarked burials at the New Vic site.

Despite publicly stating their support for the process and commitment to reconciliation, McGill and SQI have unilaterally deemed the panel’s mandate terminated, without following through on several recommendations which they agreed to be bound by in the Settlement Agreement signed in April 2023 and homologated in the Quebec Superior Court.

McGill and the SQI have recently rejected recommendations from the Panel to include a forensics expert to oversee the chain of custody of artefacts, which is an essential aspect of a credible investigation. The Settlement Agreement had resulted from an injunction won by the Mohawk Mothers in October 2022 halting the New Vic construction project to allow an “Indigenous-led” investigation of unmarked graves. The process can no longer by any means be considered “Indigenous-led”, as the SQI and McGill attempt to control the whole process, reducing the role of Indigenous people to performing ceremonies on the site. One panel member has put forth her resignation in the wake of these troubling developments.

Mohawk Mother Kahentinetha declared the turn of events “deplorable”, while Mohawk Mother Kwetiio stated that “it is very unfortunate that the SQI, as a public institution from Quebec, prefers to invest the population’s money in keeping Indigenous elders from discovering the truth about what happened to their children by fighting them in court. We were hoping for an amicable and open dialogue to resolve the disagreements in implementing the Settlement Agreement, but it is not acceptable to our people that Quebec and McGill entirely control an investigation searching for the unmarked graves of potential victims of those institutions in the past.”

On August 3rd, 2023, McGill University and the SQI published newsletters disclosing part of the results of a Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) survey performed by Geoscan on July 24, 2023, which we received the day before August 2nd, 2023. The newsletters are attached to this press release. The SQI and McGill did not consult the Kahnistensera (Mohawk Mothers) before making it public.

The two newsletters sent to the general public and media contain misleading information that must be corrected. The SQI’s newsletter suggests that “to date, no burials have been found” after the manual searches of the area where search dogs detected the scent of human remains. This fails to mention the discovery of important evidence in the soil excavated until now, including a young woman’s dress and an old pair of children leather shoes. They also fail to mention the verbal attack of Mohawk cultural monitors and elders on the site last week, who were evicted and verbally aggressed by unidentified security guards under the direction of the SQI, who also illegally grabbed someone’s telephone to erase the content of a video that was taken.

Regarding the GPR report, the SQI and McGill’s newsletters mislead the public into believing that only nine (9) anomalies were found in the rather small zone that has been surveyed so far, the “priority zone” where they want to start construction work. A far greater number of “unknown” targets were detected by the GPR team, who suggest that “It is possible that some of the unknown features may be unmarked graves, particularly in the case of older burials without coffins and also possibly child-size graves.” The burials currently being searched for following the testimonies of survivors of medical experiments at the former hospital are those of children who would likely have been clandestinely buried without coffins.