---
author: mohawk mothers
publisher: mohawk mothers
source: https://www.mohawkmothers.ca/recent-updates/mohawk-mothers-win-superior-court-judgement
summary: a press release about the superior court judgement, links to court_judgement
---

McGill and SQI Ordered to Comply with Settlement Agreement and Reinstate Expert Panel

After obtaining, one year ago to the day, a precedent-setting injunction halting excavation at the former Royal Victoria Hospital site to search for the unmarked graves of victims of medical experiments, the Mohawk Mothers, also known as the Kahnistensera, have won their bid for a safeguard order they presented at the Superior Court of Quebec on October 27, 2023.

On November 20, 2023, Justice Gregory Moore issued a judgment ordering McGill University and the Société québécoise des infrastructures (SQI) to abide by the Settlement Agreement they had signed with the self-represented Indigenous plaintiffs on April 6, 2023, and to respect the recommendations of the Expert Panel of archaeologists they had jointly selected.

Justice Moore’s judgement states that the SQI’s and McGill’s positionending the Expert Panel’s mandate on July 17th is “too restrictive,” asthe settlement agreement “does not set a term for the panel’sinvolvement in the on-going search for unmarked graves” (par 34).According to the Judge, “The delay and costs of the overall projectcannot justify the SQI’s and McGill’s unilateral reduction of theirobligations under the settlement agreement, especially when doing sowill cause irreparable harm to the plaintiffs” (par. 39).
 
For Mohawk Mother Kahentinetha, the Judgement is a relief. “We’ve fought so hard for two years to search for these missing children. Our community was targeted by genocide and our children were used as guinea pigs in these horrific experiments by the CIA to see how to kill the Indian in them. But since McGill and the SQI fired the Expert Panel we had no way to keep track and trust the results of the investigation, which was now being controlled by the perpetrators of crimes against our children. The point in signing the Settlement Agreement was to allow the experts to do their job, and we were betrayed. We had to do it all alone without lawyers, facing such powerful institutions. It wasn’t easy, but we made it. The Judge understood that the only way this can go is in a professional way, with independent experts to oversee everything and make sure our community is informed.”

The Mohawk Mothers submitted that McGill and the SQI had failed to implement numerous recommendations of the Expert Panel, notably refusing to share data from Ground Penetrating Radar surveys, refusing to adopt forensic precaution to protect the chain of custody of evidence, and depriving the Mohawk Mothers of access to crucial information such as contracts with specialists. Justice Gregory Moore found in favor of the Mohawk Mothers’ argument that the purpose of the Settlement Agreement was to rely on an independent and impartial Expert Panel to provide ongoing recommendations, in order to ensure that the New Vic Project would not result in the desecration of human remains, which survivors and search dogs indicated to be on the site.

In August 2023, McGill and the SQI fired the Expert Panel, one of whom had recently resigned, after they asked to implement forensic measures and peer review data from Ground Penetrating Radar.

Although Historic Human Remains Detection Dogs had detected the scent of human remains in the area in front of the Hersey Pavilion, McGill and the SQI declared that there was no evidence of burials there, suggested it was a false positive, and started large-scale non archaeological excavation in the zone. The Mohawk Mothers were concerned that development work in the area could start before the source of human remains in the zone was established, especially inside the Hersey Pavilion, because the dogs signaled remains next to the building's wall and because unexplained demolition work took place there.

Justice Moore’s court ruling will allow for the independent Expert Panel to provide updated recommendations regarding the zone and the larger site, after being cut off from the investigation since August.

On November 5, 2023, search dogs detected the scent of human remains in yet another zone, close to the Allan Memorial Institute where the CIA’s MK-Ultra experiments on brainwashing took place in the 1950’s and 1960’s.

The parties will be back in court on December 1st to address a motion ordering the release of records withheld by the defendants.

The Kanien'kehá:ka Kahnistensera (Mohawk Mothers) is a Kahnawake-based group that helps Indigenous women accomplish their traditional cultural duty as caretakers of the land, to protect all life, including their children and ancestors. They have been engaged in a legal challenge with promoters of the New Vic project to stall future excavation of the former Royal Victoria Hospital site until a proper archaeological investigation is conducted, using the traditional protocols of the Kaianere'kó:wa (Great Peace).