---
title: "its-empty-montreal-mohawk-womens-group-slams-popes-apology"
author: "frédéric tomesco"
publisher: "montreal gazette"
source: "https://montrealgazette.com/news/quebec/its-empty-montreal-mohawk-womens-group-slams-popes-apology"
summary: ""
tags: ["news"]
---
Pope Francis’s landmark apology over residential schools drew sharp criticism from Indigenous spokespeople in Montreal — with one Mohawk women’s group even calling for the cross on Mount Royal to be taken down as an act of contrition.
On Wednesday, two days after apologizing in Edmonton to Indigenous Peoples for the role the Roman Catholic Church played in Canada’s residential school system, the pontiff expressed his “deep shame and sorrow” and sought forgiveness for “the wrong done by so many Christians” during an address in Quebec City. He has described the Canadian trip as his “penitential” journey.
Although he branded the forced cultural assimilation of First Nations children a “deplorable evil” and “disastrous error,” Pope Francis hasn’t mentioned sexual abuse in his remarks since landing in Canada. He also hasn’t brought up the so-called Doctrine of Discovery, a centuries-old decree from the Vatican that countries such as Canada used to justify the colonization of Indigenous lands.
“If everybody thought that was a solution, that apology, they all would have been there,” Kwetiio, a Kahnawake resident and spokesperson for a group known as the Mohawk Mothers, told reporters Wednesday in Mount Royal Park. “There’s no way you could drag me there. That’s what I think about that apology. It’s empty.”
Added Kanesatake resident Karakwine, whose mother survived time in a residential school: “I’m not impressed. It doesn’t seem sincere. There were a lot of words but nothing concrete.”
An estimated 150,000 Indigenous children were forced to attend residential schools, more than 60 per cent of which were run by the Catholic Church.
Last year, the remains of more than 1,000 children — some as young as three years old — were found buried on sites of three former residential schools.