---
title: "Our Children Are Buried on These Grounds, Marchers at Old Royal Vic Site Say"
author: "Jason Magder"
publisher: "Montreal Gazette"
source: "https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/our-children-are-buried-on-these-grounds-marchers-at-old-royal-vic-site-say"
summary: "This article reports on a march at the old Royal Vic site, where participants claim their children are buried."
tags: ["news"]
---
As the sun set and cars lined up for the usual nighttime commute on Pine Ave., a group of protesters held a solemn march.
Holding candles and with many wearing orange shirts, the marchers began at the top of Peel St., near the entrance to the Allen Memorial Institute, and walked slowly down to Sherbrooke St.
The marchers were hoping to raise awareness to their demands that McGill University investigate claims of unmarked child graves on the site of the old Royal Victoria Hospital.
For years, Mohawks have heard rumours and stories that there were Indigenous children taken to the site of the Allen, and had experiments done on them.
Recently, a group called Mohawk Mothers (kanien’kehá:ka kahnistensera) began gathering evidence and pressuring authorities to open a full-scale investigation. They recently interviewed Lana Ponting, an 80-year-old woman who says she was subjected to psychiatric experiments by Dr. Donald Ewen Cameron at McGill’s Allan Memorial Institute, in April 1958, at the age of 16. The woman reportedly said there were many Indigenous children at the Institute, and also that there were rumoured to be bodies buried around the premises, including near the Henry William Morgan Pool.
“Our children are buried on these grounds,” said Kwetiio, a member of the group, who led the march. “Our investigation brought to light some instances where (Mohawk) children were experimented on. This is (Mohawk) land, and we have never given responsibility over that land to any of the past people who have acquired that land. Right now, that land needs to be investigated so that any projects that go ahead, they must ask permission from us for these things to happen.”
The Mohawk mothers presented their evidence to the city’s Office de consultation publique de Montréal on Wednesday night. Kwetiio said the group would like to halt all efforts to develop the old Royal Victoria Hospital site until the claims are verified.
“We would like to present our findings and have a conversation with McGill University and the grounds of Allen Memorial, because this needs to be rectified. There are too many of our children lost and not being found. There are too many entities not being held responsible for lands that were taken from us. They can’t take our children away from us any longer.”
McGill spokesperson Cynthia Lee told the Montreal Gazette recently the university has engaged in information and roundtable sessions with Indigenous education organizations, Mohawk alumni, and elders. She added that McGill has held more than a dozen meetings with First Nations groups and Indigenous representatives regarding the New Vic project.
In 2016, the university commissioned a study on the archeological potential of the Royal Victoria Hospital site.
“According to this study, it is unlikely that Indigenous remains will be found on the New Vic Project site,” Lee said.
Kahentinetha, another group member, said there was an Indigenous village in the area hundreds of years ago, and the land has not been ceded to non-native people.
“We are here today to tell people that we will never give you permission to do anything on our land,” she said. “Never.”
Fernand Deschamps, an area resident, said he was there to give his support to the group.
“As a Canadian and a Quebecer, I can’t accept this,” said Deschamps, wearing an orange shirt with the words ‘every child matters’ inscribed on it. “This question has to be looked at very seriously before we modernize or reconstruct in this area, that they be consulted. It’s the least we can do.”
He said it’s easy to rally behind the cause, because of all the unmarked graves that have been discovered in recent months.
“If you are a parent, if you have children, if your children die, you want them to have a dignified burial,” he said. “This is the least we can hope for.”