---
title: McGill's Royal Vic plans prompt call to check for unmarked graves
author: T'Cha Dunlevy
publisher: montreal gazette
URL: https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/mcgills-royal-vic-plans-prompt-call-to-check-for-unmarked-graves
tags: news
---
A group called the Mohawk Mothers (kanien’kehá:ka kahnistensera) is demanding “the immediate suspension” of McGill University’s expansion plan for the old Royal Victoria Hospital site, and an investigation into the possibility there could be unmarked graves of Indigenous children there.
The group claims to have recently interviewed Lana Ponting, an 80-year-old woman who says she was subjected to psychiatric experiments by Dr. Donald Ewen Cameron at McGill’s Allan Memorial Institute, in April 1958, at the age of 16. 
The woman reportedly said there were many Indigenous children at the Institute, and also that there were rumoured to be bodies buried around the premises, including near the Henry William Morgan Pool.
Dr. Cameron subjected hundreds of patients to experiments between 1948 and 1964, using massive amounts of mind-altering drugs and repeated bouts of electroconvulsive shock therapy. 
The experiments were funded by the Canadian government and, in part, by the United States’ Central Intelligence Agency, which was funnelling money to mind-control research around the continent. 
The Mohawk Mothers highlighted the period between 1954 and 1963, when experiments were conducted as part of the CIA’s MKUltra program.
“First of all, there are Iroquois villages (under) there,” said Kahentinetha, a spokesperson for the Mohawk Mothers. 
“So we want to investigate that and ask questions about it.
“Those are our children that would be in unmarked graves. 
Several people who had been (at the Allan Memorial Institute) at the time in the ’50s and ’60s told us they themselves had seen Indigenous children there.”
Part of the group’s contention is that McGill and the Royal Victoria Hospital site are on unceded Indigenous land. 
The group sent a letter of objection to McGill principal and vice-chancellor Suzanne Fortier in 2015, stating the university was built on Indigenous land without consent, using “unrepaid borrowed Iroquois trust funds,” but received no response from McGill.
The Mohawk Mothers have again requested a meeting with Fortier, and will have a hearing on the topic with the Office de consultation publique de Montréal on Nov. 10.
“It has to be proven to our satisfaction that there are no bones or bodies in unmarked graves,” Kahentinetha said, “so we want to declare this a crime scene. 
The entire McGill University is a crime scene.
“We want this investigated before anything is done at this place. 
Our main concern is our children, who are crying for us. 
We can hear them, and feel them. 
We know they want the story about what happened to them to be revealed.”
Reached by email Tuesday afternoon, McGill spokesperson Cynthia Lee said the university is “deeply committed to meaningful engagement with Indigenous communities as per the Provost’s Task Force on Indigenous Studies and Indigenous Education, and more specifically in connection with its New Vic project initiative.”
Since January, Lee said, the university has engaged in information and roundtable sessions with Indigenous education organizations, Mohawk alumni, and elders. 
She added that McGill has held more than a dozen meetings with First Nation groups and Indigenous representatives regarding the New Vic project.
In 2016, the university commissioned a study on the archeological potential of the Royal Victoria Hospital site.
“According to this study, it is unlikely that Indigenous remains will be found on the New Vic Project site,” Lee said. 
“However, should this be the case, it will be made public immediately, the work will be suspended, and an archeological officer of the Minister of Culture and Communications will be alerted (as stated in the Cultural Heritage Act).
“The university’s Indigenous Initiatives Unit would also be informed in order that the proper Indigenous protocol be followed with respect to honouring Indigenous ancestors.”